Yes, the report includes a statement that clearly defines the problem experienced by the customer. The problem is described as "As an introduction, temperatures continue to reach new highs in 2023, farm workers across Canada are at increasing risk of suffering from heat stress (1,2). Heat stress, a common aspect of heat stress, activities such as tilling soil, harvesting crops, and rearing livestock in elevated temperatures, under the radiant sun (3) can include symptoms of heat stroke which can include: 1. Rise in body temperature and behavior 2. Abnormal sweat patterns 3. Rapid breathing 4. Nausea and vomiting 5. Rapid heartbeat 6. Headache 7. Dizziness 8. Other aspects of heat stress include heat exhaustion (the body's response to an excessive loss of water and salt, through excessive sweating), and heat cramps (cramps caused by a sudden depletion of water and salt, usually through excessive sweating) and heat syncope (a sudden drop in blood pressure when the body overheats) (4). Sunburn is also common among those who are exposed to excess UV radiation, causing problems such as sunburn, heat rash, and dehydration (5)."

This statement is backed up by two citations:
1. "As an introduction, temperatures continue to reach new highs in 2023, farm workers across Canada are at increasing risk of suffering from heat stress (1,2)." - Citation [1] and [2]
2. "Heat stress, a common aspect of heat stress, activities such as tilling soil, harvesting crops, and rearing livestock in elevated temperatures, under the radiant sun (3) can include symptoms of heat stroke which can include: 1. Rise in body temperature and behavior 2. Abnormal sweat patterns 3. Rapid breathing 4. Nausea and vomiting 5. Rapid heartbeat 6. Headache 7. Dizziness 8. Other aspects of heat stress include heat exhaustion (the body's response to an excessive loss of water and salt, through excessive sweating), and heat cramps (cramps caused by a sudden depletion of water and salt, usually through excessive sweating) and heat syncope (a sudden drop in blood pressure when the body overheats) (4). Sunburn is also common among those who are exposed to excess UV radiation, causing problems such as sunburn, heat rash, and dehydration (5)." - Citation [3] and [4]